1. Stem Cells. 2023 May 15;41(5):520-539. doi: 10.1093/stmcls/sxad022.

Dynamics of Chromatin Accessibility During Hematopoietic Stem Cell 
Differentiation Into Progressively Lineage-Committed Progeny.

Martin EW(1), Rodriguez Y Baena A(1), Reggiardo RE(2), Worthington AK(1), 
Mattingly CS(2), Poscablo DM(1), Krietsch J(2), McManus MT(3), Carpenter S(1), 
Kim DH(2), Forsberg EC(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for the Biology of Stem Cells, Department of Molecular, Cell and 
Developmental Biology, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA.
(2)Institute for the Biology of Stem Cells, Department of Biomolecular 
Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Diabetes Center, W.M. Keck Center 
for Noncoding RNAs, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms regulate the multilineage differentiation capacity of 
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) into a variety of blood and immune cells. 
Mapping the chromatin dynamics of functionally defined cell populations will 
shed mechanistic insight into 2 major, unanswered questions in stem cell 
biology: how does epigenetic identity contribute to a cell type's lineage 
potential, and how do cascades of chromatin remodeling dictate ensuing fate 
decisions? Our recent work revealed evidence of multilineage gene priming in 
HSCs, where open cis-regulatory elements (CREs) exclusively shared between HSCs 
and unipotent lineage cells were enriched for DNA binding motifs of known 
lineage-specific transcription factors. Oligopotent progenitor populations 
operating between the HSCs and unipotent cells play essential roles in effecting 
hematopoietic homeostasis. To test the hypothesis that selective HSC-primed 
lineage-specific CREs remain accessible throughout differentiation, we used 
ATAC-seq to map the temporal dynamics of chromatin remodeling during progenitor 
differentiation. We observed epigenetic-driven clustering of oligopotent and 
unipotent progenitors into distinct erythromyeloid and lymphoid branches, with 
multipotent HSCs and MPPs associating with the erythromyeloid lineage. We mapped 
the dynamics of lineage-primed CREs throughout hematopoiesis and identified both 
unique and shared CREs as potential lineage reinforcement mechanisms at fate 
branch points. Additionally, quantification of genome-wide peak count and size 
revealed overall greater chromatin accessibility in HSCs, allowing us to 
identify HSC-unique peaks as putative regulators of self-renewal and 
multilineage potential. Finally, CRISPRi-mediated targeting of 
ATACseq-identified putative CREs in HSCs allowed us to demonstrate the 
functional role of selective CREs in lineage-specific gene expression. These 
findings provide insight into the regulation of stem cell multipotency and 
lineage commitment throughout hematopoiesis and serve as a resource to test 
functional drivers of hematopoietic lineage fate.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/stmcls/sxad022
PMCID: PMC10183972
PMID: 36945732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.C. is a consultant for NextRNA Therapeutics 
and received honoraria for NextRNA from the American Association of 
Immunologists. All the other authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest.