1. Cell. 2021 Sep 16;184(19):5053-5069.e23. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.039. Epub
 2021 Aug 13.

Chromatin and gene-regulatory dynamics of the developing human cerebral cortex 
at single-cell resolution.

Trevino AE(1), Müller F(2), Andersen J(3), Sundaram L(4), Kathiria A(1), 
Shcherbina A(5), Farh K(6), Chang HY(7), Pașca AM(8), Kundaje A(9), Pașca 
SP(10), Greenleaf WJ(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Center for 
Bioinformatics, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA; Stanford Brain Organogenesis Program, Wu Tsai Neuroscience 
Institute Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Biomedical Data Science Program, Stanford University, Stanford CA, USA.
(6)Illumina Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, 
USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Center for 
Personal Dynamic Regulomes, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Department of 
Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA; Stanford Brain Organogenesis Program, Wu Tsai Neuroscience 
Institute Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
spasca@stanford.edu.
(11)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Department 
of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; Chan-Zuckerberg 
Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: wjg@stanford.edu.

Genetic perturbations of cortical development can lead to neurodevelopmental 
disease, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD). To identify genomic regions 
crucial to corticogenesis, we mapped the activity of gene-regulatory elements 
generating a single-cell atlas of gene expression and chromatin accessibility 
both independently and jointly. This revealed waves of gene regulation by key 
transcription factors (TFs) across a nearly continuous differentiation 
trajectory, distinguished the expression programs of glial lineages, and 
identified lineage-determining TFs that exhibited strong correlation between 
linked gene-regulatory elements and expression levels. These highly connected 
genes adopted an active chromatin state in early differentiating cells, 
consistent with lineage commitment. Base-pair-resolution neural network models 
identified strong cell-type-specific enrichment of noncoding mutations predicted 
to be disruptive in a cohort of ASD individuals and identified frequently 
disrupted TF binding sites. This approach illustrates how cell-type-specific 
mapping can provide insights into the programs governing human development and 
disease.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.039
PMID: 34390642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests W.J.G. was a consultant 
for 10x Genomics and is named as an inventor on patents describing ATAC-seq 
methods. H.Y.C. is a co-founder of Accent Therapeutics and Boundless Bio and an 
advisor of 10x Genomics, Arsenal Biosciences, and Spring Discovery. A.S. is an 
employee of Insitro, Inc, and receives consulting fees from Myokardia, Inc. K.F. 
is an employee of Illumina, Inc.